2 Data and Methodology
The challenge to econometricians in testing our model’s predictions is the same one faced by
individual arbitrageurs in the market: to come up with a reasonable measure of aggregate
arbitrage activity for a strategy. A key contribution of this paper is to take up this challenge
directly by proposing one such measure.
Our measure is motivated by the observation that arbitrageurs tend to buy or sell a
diversified portfolio of stocks at the same time; for example, in the case of the momentum
strategy, arbitrageurs usually buy a portfolio of winner stocks and sell a portfolio of loser
stocks simultaneously. To the extent that arbitrageurs’ trading can move stock prices in the
short run, we can then infer the amount of arbitrage activity in a strategy by examining
high-frequency (i.e., daily or weekly) return correlations, over and beyond common risk
factors, among the portfolio of stocks that are likely to be bought or sold simultaneously by
arbitrageurs.12 For example, for the momentum strategy, we can extract information about
arbitrage activity in the strategy by looking at the return correlation among stocks in the
winner and/or loser portfolios.13
An alternative approach to measuring the amount of arbitrage activity in a strategy
would be to exploit the correlation of the strategy’s returns with respect to a proxy for
intermediary capital; Cho (2020) is an example of that technique.14 However, there are
12For example, Anton and Polk (2014) and Lou (2012) find that mutual funds tend to expand or shrink
their existing holdings in response to capital flows, and that such flow-induced trading can lead to excess
comovement among stocks collectively held by mutual funds.
13Frazzini et al. (2018) show that a single hedge fund can rebalance its momentum portfolio within a
day. Our analysis focuses on the aggregate quantitative momentum trader (i.e., the sum of all momentum
traders); it is reasonable to expect that the rebalancing by this aggregate investor takes place over a longer
window.
14Two additional methods for measuring arbitrage activity include using hedge fund holdings (Brunner
meier and Nagel (2004), Griffin and Xu (2009) Cao et al. (2018)) or exploiting information in short-selling
activity (Boehmer, Jones, and Zhang (2008), Yan (2013), Hanson and Sunderam (2014), and Hwang, Liu,
and Xu (2019)). In Table II, we compare comomentum to Chen, Da, and Huang (2019) who propose a Net
Arbitrage Trading measure that combines these two techniques.
7
several potential issues with this approach in our context. First, one needs to take a stand
on how to measure intermediary capital. Second, proxies for intermediary capital may not
reflect the concerns of the arbitrageurs trading the anomaly in question (e.g., momentum).
Finally, measures of intermediary capital are typically not available at high frequencies.
At the end of each month, we sort all stocks into deciles based on their previous 12
month returns (skipping the most recent month). We then compute pairwise abnormal
correlations using 52 weekly (Friday to Friday) returns for all stocks in each decile in the
portfolio ranking period. (Our results are robust to calculating abnormal correlations using
daily returns in the past year.) One concern is that arbitrageurs begin trading only after
the momentum characteristic is observed. That concern is mitigated by the fact that we
measure the momentum characteristic based on a relatively long ranking period of one year.
Indeed, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) consider ranking periods as short as three months.
Presumably many momentum traders are trading many different flavors of the momentum
strategy during our formation period and thus would be generating excess comovement
throughout our one-year ranking period.15
Of course, stocks may move together because of common news about intrinsic value.
Therefore, we industry-adjust all returns using the Fama-French 30 industry portfolios as well
as control for the Fama-French three factors when computing these abnormal correlations
to purge out any comovement in stock returns in the same momentum decile induced by
known risk factors. Since this approach may also remove non-fundamental return variation
in industry or factor returns, we are careful to confirm that our results are robust to not using
these controls. Note that we do not assume that stocks have constant Fama-French betas.
Such an approach might result in a high value of comomentum simply reflecting an increase
in the Fama-French loadings of the stocks in the momentum portfolio at a point in time.
Instead, following Lewellen and Nagel (2006), we allow betas to vary by estimating rolling
window regressions using weekly returns for each stock in each year. Like Lewellen and
Nagel (2006), we assume that betas are relatively stable only within the regression window.
So, if in a particular year, momentum stocks happen to be small stocks, our short-window
regression will remove the extent to which momentum stocks covary with SMB in that year.
15Nevertheless, if we instead measure comomentum in the post-ranking period, all of our results continue
to hold. Of course, in this case, we are careful to study momentum trading strategies that only begin after
comomentum is measured so that comomentum remains a legitimate predictor of any long-run reversal.
8
Though our approach measures comomentum over a one-year ranking period, our results
continue to hold if we measure comomentum over months t − 7 : t − 2 in the formation
period. Since it is even more unlikely that conditional betas change substantially over a six
month window, this test further confirms that conditional betas are unlikely to be driving
time-series variation in comomentum. Furthermore, that result shows more broadly that our
f
indings are not sensitive to the length of the comomentum estimation window.
Our primary comomentum measure, CoMOM, is a simple average of loser comomen
tum (CoMOML) and winner comomentum (CoMOMW) which are the average pairwise
abnormal correlation for the loser and winner deciles respectively. We operationalize this
calculation by measuring the average correlation of the three-factor residual of every stock
in a particular decile with the decile in question,
CoMOML = 1
NL
CoMOMW = 1
NW
NL
i=1
NW
i=1
Corr(retL
i , retL
−i | rmrf,smb,hml)
Corr(retW
i , retW
−i | rmrf,smb,hml)
CoMOM = .5∗(CoMOMW +CoMOML)
(1)
(2)
(3)
where retL
i (retW
i ) is the weekly industry-adjusted return of stock i in the extreme loser
(winner) decile, retL
−i (retW
−i) is the weekly industry-adjusted return of the equal-weight
extreme loser (winner) decile excluding stock i, and NL (NW) is the number of stocks in
the extreme loser (winner) decile.16 Note that Table IV documents that our key result is
robust to many variations in our methodology. These variations include examining different
subperiods and subsamples, computing comomentum in a variety of ways, controlling for a
variety of potentially relevant time-series variables, implementing a variety of performance
adjustments, and measuring performance in a strictly out-of-sample fashion as in Goyal and
Welch (2008).
The main dataset used in this study is the stock return data from the Center for Re
search in Security Prices (CRSP). To mitigate the impact of microstructure issues, stocks
16We measure comomentum as the average correlation of stock i and the decile portfolio that excludes
stock i. However, this approach is not critical. If we instead use average pairwise correlations between all the
stocks in a decile, the correlation between comomentum measures constructed in these slightly two different
ways is extremely high, at 0.98.
9
with prices below $5 a share and/or that are in the bottom NYSE size decile are excluded
from the sample. We then augment the stock return data with institutional ownership in
individual stocks provided by Thomson Financial. We further obtain information on assets
under management of active mutual funds and long-short equity hedge funds from Thom
son Reuters and Lipper’s Trading Advisor Selection System (TASS), respectively. Since the
assets managed by mutual funds and hedge funds grow substantially in our sample period,
both variables are detrended. Finally, we obtain monthly returns of actively-managed eq
uity mutual funds and long-short equity hedge funds from the CRSP survivorship-bias free
mutual fund database and the Lipper TASS database, respectively.
3 Main Results
We first document simple characteristics of our comomentum measure. Table I Panel A
indicates that comomentum varies significantly through time. We primarily focus on the
period from 1965 to 2011, as institutional investing of the sort in which we are interested
was relatively small pre-1965, a fact we exploit in one of our placebo tests. (Since we examine
momentum and value strategy returns in the four years following portfolio formation, our
return data end in 2015.)
During this period, momentum stocks have an economically-large average abnormal re
turn correlation of 0.092 during the formation period across the 47-year sample. However,
this abnormal correlation can be as low as 0.037 and as high as 0.241. As one would expect
and Table I Panel B shows, the components of CoMOM are highly correlated (correla
tion of 0.467). Furthermore, CoMOM and its components are highly autocorrelated and
cross-autocorrelated (Table I Panel C).
Figure 1 plots our comomentum measure. For comparison, we also plot the average excess
correlation for a momentum-neutral portfolio (deciles 5 and 6 in our momentum sort). The
f
igure makes it clear that variation in comomentum is distinct from variation in the average
excess correlation of the typical stock. Moreover, the figure confirms that comomentum is
persistent. The serial correlation in the time series of comomentum is 0.48, while the serial
10
correlation of deciles five and six is a significantly smaller 0.26.17
Figure 1 shows that comomentum was high during the tech boom when momentum
strategies were popular. There was also an increase in comomentum in the 2008 financial
crisis, which may seem surprising at first. However, a more careful analysis reveals that
f
inancial stocks were initially hit with bad news in mid-2008; investors then sold even more
f
inancial stocks in late 2008, for many reasons (e.g., binding risk or portfolio constraints).
This is indeed a form of momentum trading, on the short side, and is correctly picked
up by our comomentum measure. As we show in robustness checks, our main result—that
comomentum predicts lower momentum returns and stronger long-run reversals—is virtually
unchanged even if we exclude 2008-09 from our sample.
We confirm that comomentum is also persistent in event time. In particular, the average
excess correlation in Year 1 is more than half of its Year 0 value. Moreover, the correlation
between Year 0 and Year 1 comomentum is 0.48, and even Year 2 remains quite correlated
with the Year 0 value (around 0.40). Figure 2 shows this event-time evolution of comomen
tum. The plot documents that the abnormal comovement among momentum stocks peaks
in the formation year and then slowly decays over the next three years, holding the stocks in
question fixed. Figure 2 further shows that these event-time patterns are similar but stronger
for years in which comomentum (i.e., the Year 0 value of the abnormal comovement we plot
in these graphs) is particularly high.
Table I provides similar statistics for the two existing variables that the literature has
linked to time variation in expected momentum returns. Cooper, Gutierrez, and Hameed
(2004) argue that momentum profits depend on the state of the market. Specifically, the
momentum premium falls to zero when the past three-year market return has been negative.
In related work, Wang and Xu (2015) argue that relatively high market volatility forecasts
relatively low momentum returns. Therefore, we include the past two-year return on the
market portfolio and the monthly market return volatility over the past two years as control
variables in many of our tests. (Our results are robust to controlling for market returns and
volatilities measured over different horizons.) Table I shows that comomentum is negatively
correlated with the past return on the market (-0.368) and positively correlated with past
17Note that we calculate this serial correlation for annual observations of comomentum so that each
comomentum value corresponds to a non-overlapping formation period.
11
market volatility (0.278).
3.1 Linking Comomentum to Arbitrage Activity
Table II links comomentum to several variables that proxy for the size of arbitrage activity in
the momentum strategy. Specifically, Table II forecasts year t comomentum with these prox
ies. The first variable we include is the performance of the momentum strategy (MOMt−1)
in year t−1 (prior to the construction of comomentum). One would expect that momentum
capital would be positively related to recent performance. Our next variable is the aggregate
institutional ownership of the winner decile, PIHW
t−1, measured using the Thomson Financial
Institutional Holdings 13F database. We include institutional ownership as these investors
are typically considered smart money, at least relative to individuals. We also include the
assets under management (AUMt−1) of long-short equity hedge funds as of the end of year
t −1.
Note that we find a positive but relatively weak trend in our comomentum variable.18
The lack of a strong trend might initially be surprising, given the increase in the raw dollar
amount of arbitrage capital over the last 40 years. However, comomentum is designed to
capture short-term price (co-)fluctuations that are caused by arbitrage trading. Though
it is true that more arbitrageurs are trading the momentum strategy over time, it seems
reasonable that markets have generally become more liquid so that each dollar of arbitrage
trading causes a smaller price impact. Nevertheless, we detrend all variables in Table II to
ensure that our results are not spurious.
The first column of Table II documents that past performance on the strategy strongly
forecasts CoMOM. This finding is consistent with our hypothesis as we expect arbitrageurs
to move into the momentum strategy if past returns to the strategy have been strong. An
increase in arbitrageurs will then cause the strategy to be more crowded and thus comomen
tum to be higher. We next show in Column (2) that a relatively high level of institutional
ownership among winner stocks forecasts relatively high comomentum. Column (3) docu
ments that when AUMt−1 is relatively high, future comomentum is relatively high as well.
18A regression on monthly CoMOM on a trend produces a trend coefficient estimate of 0.00007551 with
a t-statistic of 11.01. This estimate implies an increase of 0.0042 in CoMOM over the sample period. All
results in the paper are robust to removing this trend from CoMOM prior to the analysis.
12
This result is comforting as hedge funds are known to deploy momentum strategies. Column
(4) confirms that when included in the same regression, MOMt−1, PIHW
t−1, and AUMt−1
continue to forecast time-series variation in CoMOM.
Chen, Da, and Huang (2019) propose a stock-level measure of net arbitrage trading,
NAT, that combines hedge fund long positions and total short interest. In columns (5) and
(6) of Table II, we explain variation in comomentum with NAT. In column (5), we separately
include measures of net arbitrage trading for the winner side, NATW, and the loser side,
NATL. In column (6), we simply use the difference between those two measures. We find
that both NATW and NATL provide incremental explanatory power that is economically
and statistically significant. Indeed, the adjusted R2 increases by 17 percentage points. The
coefficients on these two variables are of opposite signs, as one would expect, and are of
similar magnitudes. Column (6) documents that when we combine these two measures into
one composite variable, NATW −NATL, we continue to explain a significant proportion of
the variation in CoMOM.
3.2 Forecasting Long-run Momentum Reversal
Wenowturnto the main empirical question of our paper: Does variation in arbitrage activity
forecast variation in the long-run reversal of momentum returns? Table III tracks the profits
on our momentum strategy over the four years subsequent to portfolio formation. Such an
event time approach allows us to make statements about whether momentum profits revert.
Table III Panel A reports the results of this analysis. In particular, at the end of each
month t −1, we sort all stocks into deciles based on their past 11-month return (skipping
a month). We then form a zero-cost portfolio that goes long a value-weight portfolio of the
stocks in the top decile and short a value-weight portfolio of stocks in the bottom decile. All
months are then classified into five groups based on their CoMOM after first orthogonalizing
CoMOM to mktret24 and mktvol24.19
Panel A reports the average returns in each of the subsequent four years (tabulated as
19Our results are robust to controlling for different measures of past market performance and volatility,
including measuring the weekly volatility of market returns over the same window as our comomentum
measure. Our results are also robust to not orthogonalizing comomentum at all.
13
Year 1, Year 2, Years 1 and 2, and Years 3 and 4) as well as the returns in the formation
period (labeled Year 0) for each of these five groups. We also report the difference between
the extreme high and low comomentum groups. In addition to these sorts, Table III also
reports the OLS coefficient from regressing the monthly series of realized Year 0, Year 1,
Year 2, Years 1 and 2, or Years 3 and 4 returns on the monthly series of comomentum ranks.
We find that Year 0 returns are monotonically increasing in comomentum. On average,
the momentum differential between winners and losers is 2.59% per month higher (t-statistic
of 2.45) when comomentum is in the highest quintile compared to when it is in the lowest
quintile. Though formation returns are higher when comomentum is high, we find that
post-formation returns in Year 1 are generally decreasing in the degree of comomentum. On
average, the post-formation monthly momentum return is 1.06% per month lower (estimate
=-1.06%, t-statistic of-2.72) when comomentum is in the highest quintile compared to the
lowest quintile.20
We also find that Year 2 returns are strongly decreasing in comomentum. On average,
the post-formation monthly return on momentum stocks in Year 2 is 1.08% per month lower
(estimate of-1.08%, t-statistic of-2.75) as comomentum moves from the highest to the lowest
quintile. Given the strength of the Year 1 and Year 2 estimates, it is not surprising that
the joint estimate is both economically and statistically very significant (estimate of-1.07%,
t-statistic of-3.35). Indeed, Panel A documents that Years 1 and 2 returns are strongly
monotonically decreasing in comomentum. By the end of Year 2, all reversal of the relative
variation in Year 0 returns has occurred as we find no variation in cumulative returns related
to comomentum. Panels B and C of Table III document that these conclusions are robust
to controlling for the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model and the Fama and French
(2015) five-factor model.21
Figure 3 shows the patterns in Table III Panel A graphically. The top panel in Figure
3 plots the cumulative returns to the momentum strategy in the four years after portfolio
20Following prior literature, we skip a month between momentum portfolio formation and holding periods.
We observe a similar pattern in momentum returns in the skipped month; the momentum strategy yields
almost 2% higher in low comomentum periods than in high comomentum periods in that month.
21A natural question to ask is whether our main finding is stronger when CoMOML and CoMOMW are
both in the highest rank. In unreported results, we find that a double sort on these two components of
comomentum results in even stronger return predictability compared to our baseline result. Specifically, the
difference in the Years 1-2 premium is-2.06%, nearly twice the baseline result of-1.07%. We thank a referee
for this suggestion.
14
formation conditional on low comomentum or high comomentum. This plot shows that the
cumulative average buy-and-hold return on the momentum strategy is positive when como
mentum is low and negative when comomentum is high. The bottom panel in Figure 3 plots
the cumulative buy-and-hold return to the momentum strategy from the beginning of the
formation year to four years after portfolio formation, again conditional on low comomentum
or high comomentum. This plot shows that when comomentum is low, cumulative buy-and
hold returns from the beginning of the portfolio formation year to four years subsequent
exhibit underreaction. However, when comomentum is high, the corresponding cumulative
returns exhibit overreaction as returns decline from a peak of 267% in month 6 of year 1
(including the formation period return spread) to 192% in month 12 of Year 4. Interestingly,
this amount is roughly similar to the level of cumulative returns in low comomentum states,
suggesting that the amount of fundamental news does not vary with the amount of arbitrage
activity in the strategy.
Figure 3 also sheds light on the frequency at which positive feedback happens as all of the
overreaction response occurs in the formation period. In stark contrast, month t+1 holding
period returns are not higher during high comomentum periods.22
Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) and Daniel, Jagannathan, and Kim (2018) study the non
normality of momentum returns with a particular focus on the negative skewness in momen
tum returns. Both papers argue that momentum crashes are forecastable.23 To the extent
that many quantitative momentum traders use leverage and/or have short-term capital,
crowded trading may lead to forced unwinding of their positions and hence higher momen
tum crash risk. Panel D of Table III reports the extent to which comomentum forecasts
time-series variation in the crash risk of momentum returns. We examine the fraction of
“bad” momentum days in the twelve months post formation, following low vs. high como
22One interesting question is whether crowded trading can predictably increase the profitability of mo
mentum strategies, at least in the short run. For example, can smart arbitrageurs profitably “ride the
bubble” as in Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) using a faster momentum strategy? As one way to address
this question, we have redone our analysis on a six-month momentum strategy. Using comomentum com
puted over this shorter window, we find that the three-factor adjusted momentum strategy return in the
top CoMOM quintile is an economically and statistically significant 2.21% (t=2.64) in the month following
portfolio formation.
23Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) show that market declines and high market volatility forecast momentum
crashes. Daniel, Jagannathan, and Kim (2018) estimate a hidden Markov model that helps identify those
times when momentum strategies experience severe losses.
15
mentum periods. We define “bad” days as having a momentum return below-1%.24 Panel
D documents that this measure is strongly increasing in comomentum. For example, in the
f
irst three months post portfolio formation, when comomentum is low, only 8.4% of the daily
returns on momentum stocks are less than 1%. This percentage is more than doubled to
22.5%, when comomentum is high. On a related note, Appendix Table A2 reports the extent
to which comomentum forecasts time-series variation in the skewness of momentum returns.
We examine both the skewness of daily returns (in months 1-3) and weekly returns (months
1-6 and months 1-12).25